Drivers (#8664)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/fusion/adbc.md

unlisted: true
---

# Arrow ADBC and Fusion

This document provides technical guidance for dbt partners and vendors on how to design, build, and maintain ADBC (Apache Arrow Database Connectivity) drivers for <Constant name="fusion" />, the new dbt engine.

<Constant name="fusion" /> leverages ADBC as a unified driver layer for seamless, high-performance integration with data platforms. Building an ADBC driver is the first step to connecting <Constant name="fusion" /> with a new platform.

## Why Fusion uses ADBC

The <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> represents a major evolution in the dbt engine with minimal changes to the authoring layer. Built in Rust, <Constant name="fusion" /> delivers speed, language understanding, and seamless integration with numerous data warehouses. A key aspect of the new engine is its adoption of ADBC &mdash; a modern, open standard from the Apache Arrow project that simplifies columnar data interchange across platforms.

Historically, <Constant name="core" />  adapters required bespoke connection logic for each data platform. <Constant name="fusion" /> improves on this model with a unified ADBC driver layer that offers several key advantages:

> - **Standardization**: ADBC standardizes common platform features across a single interface.

Reviewer: Really appreciate this being listed first because it's more important than the performance gains.

- **Performance**: Drivers leverage Arrow's columnar memory format for efficient query execution with minimal transformations.
- **Maintainability**: ADBC drivers follow a shared specification, reducing the complexity of implementing new adapters.

## Technical overview

> This technical specification covers ADBC 22. For the latest information and detailed documentation, refer to the [ADBC documentation](https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/current/), which is the source of truth.

Reviewer: "ADBC 22" is the version of the open-source implementation. The specification is also versioned, so this can be misunderstood. The specification is going to be backwards compatible so what you say today will remain valid.

The ADBC API provides a powerful array of features, but you don't need to implement all of them. This section covers the API surface required for <Constant name="fusion" /> compatibility.

### Programming language

**tl;dr: Use Go.**

One distinct advantage of Arrow ADBC is portability. You can write drivers in various languages and load them via driver managers. This portability allows <Constant name="fusion" /> (written in Rust) to leverage drivers written in other languages.

For <Constant name="fusion" /> compatibility, drivers must:

> - Be written in a compiled language with no runtime

Reviewer: Go has a runtime and a GC but it's well behaved and engineered to allow the compilation of Go code into shared libraries that can be loaded from any program. That's not true of C#, Java...

### ADBC specifications

This section covers the minimum requirements for a <Constant name="fusion" />-compatible ADBC driver. For complete details on the ADBC specification and driver development, refer to the [ADBC driver authoring guide](https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/current/driver/authoring.html).

Drivers consist of several key abstractions:

1. **Driver**: Load a driver to create databases.
2. **Database**: Create databases and set configuration options (including authentication). Use databases to open connections.
3. **Connection**: Establish connections to the warehouse. Connections create statements.
4. **Statement**: Set options and SQL queries on statements, then execute them against the warehouse.

<Constant name="fusion" /> achieves high performance through aggressive parallelism, so expect many simultaneous connections during project execution.

### Authentication

> Drivers handle authentication through key-value options set on the database. <Constant name="fusion" /> passes options from user-authored `profiles.yml` files directly to the driver. For example, OAuth typically requires one option to control the authentication type, plus additional options for client ID and client secret (depending on the OAuth flavor). For more information, refer to [dbt profiles](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml).

Reviewer: The `dbt-auth` crate in Fusion does a non-trivial translation. What dbt calls `"client_secret"` on Snowflake gets set on the drivers as `"adbc.snowflake.sql.client_option.client_secret"`.

All the translations for Snowflake live in a single source file [1] available in the open repo.

[1] https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-fusion/blob/main/crates/dbt-auth/src/snowflake/mod.rs

#### Credential caching

For authentication methods that require browser interaction (user-to-machine OAuth, SSO, or MFA), implement credential caching. Due to <Constant name="fusion" />'s highly parallel execution, without caching, every new connection prompts the user for authentication repeatedly.

Your credential cache must:

> - Block new connections until an initial connection establishes and stores a token in memory (avoiding the thundering herd problem).

Reviewer: This blocking is only needed for connection that require the user typing something in the browser, going through SSO... we really appreciate parallel connection creation if possible.

- Handle token refresh using the same blocking principle when invalidation occurs.
- Use interprocess, file-system-based storage** to support the LSP, which runs in a separate process.

> This caching is critical for any browser-based or MFA authentication option.

Reviewer: I think this point should prefix the recommendations above. username/password auth with the password being placed in profiles.yml can be totally parallel.

For more information on profile configuration, refer to [dbt profiles](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml).

#### Credential caching

Simple authentication methods (like username/password stored in `profiles.yml`) support fully parallel connection creation with no special handling required.

For authentication methods that require browser interaction (user-to-machine OAuth, SSO, or MFA), implement credential caching. Due to <Constant name="fusion" />'s highly parallel execution, without caching, every new connection prompts the user for authentication repeatedly.

Your credential cache for browser-based authentication must:

- Block new connections until an initial connection establishes and stores a token in memory (avoiding the thundering herd problem).
- Handle token refresh using the same blocking principle when invalidation occurs.
- Use interprocess, file-system-based storage to support the LSP, which runs in a separate process.

This caching is critical for any browser-based or MFA authentication option, but is not needed for simple credential-based authentication.

> ## Required APIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Minimum Required ADBC Interface
```

> This section covers the minimum API set for <Constant name="fusion" /> compatibility. The requirements are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section covers the minimum ADBC driver methods that you must implement for <Constant name="fusion" /> compatibility. The requirements are:
```

> - Authentication via options.

Reviewer 2: Is this referring to `SetOptions`? should we specify?

- SQL query execution.
- Metadata queries to understand remote warehouse state (certain connection-level metadata functions can use cheaper or more performant APIs to pull table schemas).

> These requirements are not exhaustive. dbt Labs encourages implementing the full ADBC specification to benefit both <Constant name="fusion" /> and the broader ADBC community.

Reviewer 2: can we provide an example using the minimum required methods or is it all done in a UI?

> These requirements are not exhaustive. dbt Labs encourages implementing the full ADBC specification to benefit both <Constant name="fusion" /> and the broader ADBC community.

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the full ADBC spec? Is this the one for Snowflake? https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/current/driver/snowflake.html
